---
title: Generating drafts
sidebar_position: 3
slug: /generating-drafts
---

## Introduction
SIL International’s Natural Language Processing team has developed a tool that can assist in Bible translation by creating a rough first draft for translators to edit and refine. As of January 1st, 2024, this tool is now available for use within [Scripture Forge](https://scriptureforge.org/), a scripture editing platform that is closely integrated with [Paratext](https://paratext.org/). 

All of the drafts that are created contain errors that need to be corrected by the translation team. For some projects, the quality will be too low to be useful. However, extensive field testing has shown that a significant number of teams find the drafts to be very helpful in their work, and of sufficient quality to use as a starting point for the team to edit.

Ultimately, the measure of success for the drafts is in their usefulness as a tool to assist the translation team in their work, not their ability to stand alone as a finished product.

## How it works

In order to use the tool effectively, it's important to understand how it works. The drafts are created using a two-step process:
1. Learn the language.
2. Translate the text.

The most important step is the first one, the learning of the language. The quality of the draft that is created depends almost entirely on how well this step goes.

The system learns by seeing the same sentence written in multiple languages, one in a language that it already understands, and one in the language you are translating into. 

The most important point to remember is that these sentences need to say the same thing in both languages. This is the same principle that allowed scholars to learn hieroglyphics from the Rosetta Stone: the same text was written in three different languages, allowing comparison between a language that was already understood and one that was not.

Text that is available in both the language you are translating from, and the language you are translating to, is known as "parallel text". In general, the more parallel text you have, the better the system will learn the language. For most projects, this parallel text will be your reference text, and the translation work you have already completed. At this time, we recommend that you have at least the New Testament translated.

## Example use cases

### A basic example

Suppose a translation team is translating the Bible into a local language, using the English NIV as a reference text. The team has completed the entire New Testament, and is beginning work on Genesis. The system would generate a draft as follows:

1. Compare the English NIV New Testament with the local language New Testament, in order to learn the language..
2. Having learned the language, translate Genesis from the English NIV into the local language.

After generating the book of Genesis, the team would edit the draft to correct any errors. Afterwards, they would be able to generate a draft of the next book they plan to work on, and the system would use the translation of Genesis to improve the quality of the next draft.

### A more complex example

In the first example, the team was using the English NIV as a reference text, and the system learned the language by comparing the English NIV with the local language New Testament. However, in many cases a better quality draft can be generated by using a different text than the one the team is translating from.

For example, it is often possible to improve the quality of the draft by using a back translation of the local language into the source language. If the team has back translated the project into English, it could be used as the reference text instead of the English NIV. A back translation is usually much more literal than a normal translation, and therefore makes it easier for the system to understand how the local language maps to English. In this example, the system would generate a draft as follows:

1. Compare the English back translation with the local language New Testament, in order to learn the language..
2. Having learned the language, translate Genesis from the English NIV into the local language.

Determining the ideal setup for a project is a complex process, and it's not something you will need to learn. The SIL Natural Language Processing team is developing tools to determine the ideal setup, and can assist teams during the onboarding process.

### Generating back translations

In addition to creating drafts into the vernacular language, the system can also generate back translations into [supported source languages](#supported-languages-for-back-translation-drafting). In order to generate a back translation draft, the team needs to already have back translated at least a few books from the vernacular language into the source language.

In this example, suppose a team has translated the four gospels into the vernacular language, and has back translated Matthew, Mark, and Luke into English. To generate a back translation draft of John, the system would do the following:

1. Compare the English back translations of Matthew, Mark, and Luke with the vernacular language versions of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in order to learn the language.
2. Having learned the language, translate John from the vernacular language into English.

Back translation drafts will also contain errors and need to be edited, but the quality is usually substantially higher than for the vernacular drafts.

## Getting started

Generating back translation drafts is currently open and available to all Paratext users. Generating drafts into the vernacular, due to the complexity involved in setup, requires a team to be onboarded by the SIL Natural Language Processing team. Please fill out the [translation drafting registration form](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/305798a45a664d8585ac74e72241d8cc), and a member of the team will assess whether your project is a good candidate for generating drafts.

Regardless of whether you are generating back translation drafts or vernacular drafts, you can begin by connecting your Paratext project to Scripture Forge by following these steps:

1. Log in to [Scripture Forge](https://scriptureforge.org/), using your Paratext credentials.
2. Connect your Paratext project by following the [Connect a Paratext Project guide](https://help.scriptureforge.org/connect-paratext-project). When you connect the project, select your reference text as the source. For a back translation, the source text should be the vernacular.
3. After connecting your project, click "Generate draft" in the sidebar.
4. If you are generating a draft into the vernacular, this is as far as you can on your own, and you will need to fill out the [translation drafting registration form](https://app.smartsheet.com/b/form/305798a45a664d8585ac74e72241d8cc). If your project has already been onboarded, or you are working with a back translation, click "Generate draft" to start the process.
5. Select the books you want to translate, and then select the books you want to use as training data.
6. Click "Generate draft" to start the process.

The draft generating process can take anywhere from several hours to several days.

Once you have a draft generated, you can preview the draft and import individual chapters into your project.


## Supported languages for back translation drafting

Back translation drafts can be generated from any language, but must be back translated into one of the following languages.

Language name | ISO 639-2 (T) code
--------------|-------------------
Achinese | ace
Mesopotamian Arabic | acm
Ta'izzi-Adeni Arabic | acq
Tunisian Arabic | aeb
Afrikaans | afr
South Levantine Arabic | ajp
Akan | aka
Amharic | amh
North Levantine Arabic | apc
Arabic | arb
Najdi Arabic | ars
Moroccan Arabic | ary
Egyptian Arabic | arz
Assamese | asm
Asturian | ast
Awadhi | awa
Aymara | ayr
South Azerbaijani | azb
Azerbaijani | azj
Bashkir | bak
Bambara | bam
Balinese | ban
Belarusian | bel
Bemba | bem
Bangla | ben
Bhojpuri | bho
Banjar | bjn
Tibetan | bod
Bosnian | bos
Buginese | bug
Bulgarian | bul
Catalan | cat
Cebuano | ceb
Czech | ces
Chokwe | cjk
Central Kurdish | ckb
Crimean Turkish | crh
Welsh | cym
Danish | dan
German | deu
din | dik
Dyula | dyu
Dzongkha | dzo
Greek | ell
English | eng
Esperanto | epo
Estonian | est
Basque | eus
Ewe | ewe
Faroese | fao
Fijian | fij
Finnish | fin
Fon | fon
French | fra
Friulian | fur
Nigerian Fulfulde | fuv
Scottish Gaelic | gla
Irish | gle
Galician | glg
Guarani | grn
Gujarati | guj
Haitian Creole | hat
Hausa | hau
Hebrew | heb
Hindi | hin
Chhattisgarhi | hne
Croatian | hrv
Hungarian | hun
Armenian | hye
Igbo | ibo
Iloko | ilo
Indonesian | ind
Icelandic | isl
Italian | ita
Javanese | jav
Japanese | jpn
Kabyle | kab
Kachin | kac
Kamba | kam
Kannada | kan
Kashmiri | kas
Georgian | kat
kr | knc
Kazakh | kaz
Kabiye | kbp
Kabuverdianu | kea
Khmer | khm
Kikuyu | kik
Kinyarwanda | kin
Kyrgyz | kir
Kimbundu | kmb
Kurdish | kmr
Kongo | kon
Korean | kor
Lao | lao
Ligurian | lij
Limburgish | lim
Lingala | lin
Lithuanian | lit
Lombard | lmo
Latgalian | ltg
Luxembourgish | ltz
Luba-Lulua | lua
Ganda | lug
Luo | luo
Mizo | lus
Latvian | lvs
Magahi | mag
Maithili | mai
Malayalam | mal
Marathi | mar
Minangkabau | min
Macedonian | mkd
Malagasy | plt
Maltese | mlt
Manipuri | mni
Mongolian | khk
Mossi | mos
Māori | mri
Burmese | mya
Dutch | nld
Norwegian Nynorsk | nno
Norwegian Bokmål | nob
Nepali | npi
Northern Sotho | nso
Nuer | nus
Nyanja | nya
Occitan | oci
Oromo | gaz
Odia | ory
Pangasinan | pag
Punjabi | pan
Papiamento | pap
Persian | pes
Polish | pol
Portuguese | por
Dari | prs
Southern Pashto | pbt
Quechua | quy
Romanian | ron
Rundi | run
Russian | rus
Sango | sag
Sanskrit | san
Santali | sat
Sicilian | scn
Shan | shn
Sinhala | sin
Slovak | slk
Slovenian | slv
Samoan | smo
Shona | sna
Sindhi | snd
Somali | som
Southern Sotho | sot
Spanish | spa
Albanian | als
Sardinian | srd
Serbian | srp
Swazi | ssw
Sundanese | sun
Swedish | swe
Swahili | swh
Silesian | szl
Tamil | tam
Tatar | tat
Telugu | tel
Tajik | tgk
Filipino | tgl
Thai | tha
Tigrinya | tir
Tamashek | taq
Tok Pisin | tpi
Tswana | tsn
Tsonga | tso
Turkmen | tuk
Tumbuka | tum
Turkish | tur
Akan | twi
Tamazight | tzm
Uyghur | uig
Ukrainian | ukr
Umbundu | umb
Urdu | urd
Uzbek | uzn
Venetian | vec
Vietnamese | vie
Waray | war
Wolof | wol
Xhosa | xho
Yiddish | ydd
Yoruba | yor
Cantonese | yue
Chinese | zho
Malay | zsm
